nixosTest matrix (prev also modularity, option docs) (#176557)
NixOS/nixpkgs: nixos/doc/manual/development/writing-nixos-tests.section.md

# Writing Tests {#sec-writing-nixos-tests}

> A NixOS test is a Nix module that has the following structure:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A NixOS test is a NixOS module that has the following structure:
```

Oh boy, I just realized the NixOS manual _still_ does not have a proper definition of modules. The good one we have is [NixOS Wiki - Module](https://nixos.wiki/wiki/Module).

Author: I don't think we should call a module a NixOS module if it doesn't mix with actual NixOS modules. Calling it a "Nix module" (like I did) is also wrong. I'll use just "module".

Reviewer: Good point.

}
```

We refer to the whole test above as a test module, whereas the values

> in [`nodes.<name>`](#opt-nodes) are NixOS modules themselves.

Reviewer 2: I think it makes more sense to not use the term "NixOS module" but "NixOS configuration" because NixOS configurations (as they are first seen by users in the `configuration.nix` are a more specific type of function than modules, they just make use of the module convention.

> We refer to the whole test above as a test module, whereas the values
> in [`nodes.<name>`](#opt-nodes) are NixOS modules. (A NixOS configuration is a module.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We refer to the whole test above as a test module, whereas the values
in [`nodes.<name>`](#opt-nodes) are NixOS modules themselves.
```

This should just link to a section that defines modules, once we have it. For now let's assume readers know what a NixOS module is, so we don't have to change this bit later.

> The option [`testScript`](#opt-testScript) is a bit of Python code that executes the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The option [`testScript`](#opt-testScript) is a piece of Python code that executes the
```

[`nfs/simple.nix`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/tests/nfs/simple.nix).
It uses two client nodes to test correct locking across server crashes.

## Calling a test {#sec-calling-nixos-tests}

Tests are invoked a bit differently depending on whether the test lives in NixOS or in another project.

### Testing within NixOS {#sec-call-nixos-test-in-nixos}

Test modules can be instantiated into derivations in multiple ways.

Tests that are part of NixOS are added to [`nixos/tests/all-tests.nix`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/tests/all-tests.nix).

```nix
  hostname = runTest ./hostname.nix;
```

Overrides can be added by defining an anonymous module in `all-tests.nix`.
For the purpose of constructing a test matrix, [use the `matrix` options](#sec-nixos-test-matrix) instead.

```nix
  hostname = runTest { imports = [ ./hostname.nix ]; defaults.networking.firewall.enable = false; };
```

You can run a test with attribute name `mytest` in `nixos/tests/all-tests.nix` by invoking:

```shell

> nix-build -A nixosTests.mytest

Reviewer 3: As a beginner, one sometimes misses the intricacies, that are very obvious to veteran maintainers. I might probably execute the given command to run tests at first in `nixpkgs/nixos/tests` (because I just edited `all-tests.nix` there) or `nixpkgs/nixos/` (because I added a test to NixOS), being befuddled by the error messages, before running it in `nixpkgs/` itself, where it actually works.

```suggestion
cd /my/git/clone/of/nixpkgs
nix-build -A nixosTests.mytest
```

Author: :+1: , thanks!

[`nfs/simple.nix`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/tests/nfs/simple.nix).
It uses two client nodes to test correct locking across server crashes.

## Calling a test {#sec-calling-nixos-tests}

> Tests are invoked a bit differently depending on whether the test lives in NixOS or in another project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tests are invoked differently depending on whether the test lives in NixOS or in another project.
```

### Testing within NixOS {#sec-call-nixos-test-in-nixos}

> Test modules can be instantiated into derivations in multiple ways.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Test modules can be added to derivations in multiple ways.
```

Not sure if "instantiate" is the right word at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Actually this is stating the obvious, because the three variants follow immediately and there is nothing else in this section. We can remove it.

Tests that are part of NixOS are added to [`nixos/tests/all-tests.nix`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/tests/all-tests.nix).

```nix
  hostname = runTest ./hostname.nix;
```

> Overrides can be added by defining an anonymous module in `all-tests.nix`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Overrides can be added by defining an anonymous module in `all-tests.nix` and passing it to `runTest`.
```

> For the purpose of constructing a test matrix, [use the `matrix` options](#sec-nixos-test-matrix) instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the purpose of constructing a test matrix, use the [`matrix` options](#sec-nixos-test-matrix) instead.
```

```nix

>   hostname = runTest { imports = [ ./hostname.nix ]; defaults.networking.firewall.enable = false; };

Reviewer: For consistency with the other example, which is also multiline.

```suggestion
  hostname = runTest {
    imports = [ ./hostname.nix ];
    defaults.networking.firewall.enable = false;
  };
```

```

> You can run a test with attribute name `mytest` in `nixos/tests/all-tests.nix` by invoking:
> 
> ```shell
> cd /my/git/clone/of/nixpkgs
> nix-build -A nixosTests.mytest

Reviewer: It is a bit confusing that within the same example thread we use `hostname` and `mytest`.

```suggestion
You can run a test with attribute name `hostname` in `nixos/tests/all-tests.nix` by invoking:

```shell
cd /my/git/clone/of/nixpkgs
nix-build -A nixosTests.hostname
```

Alternatively use `mytest` consistently.

```

### Testing outside the NixOS project {#sec-call-nixos-test-outside-nixos}

> Outside the `nixpkgs` repository, you can instantiate the test by first acquiring the NixOS library,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Outside the `nixpkgs` repository, you can instantiate the test by first importing the NixOS library,
```

```nix
# regular nix
let nixos-lib = import (nixpkgs + "/nixos/lib") { };
in
```

```nix
# flake
let nixos-lib = nixpkgs.lib.nixos;
in
```

... and then invoking `runTest`, for example:

```nix
nixos-lib.runTest {
  imports = [ ./test.nix ];
  hostPkgs = pkgs;  # the Nixpkgs package set used outside the VMs
  defaults.services.foo.package = mypkg;
}
```

> `runTest` returns a derivation that runs the test, or an attrset tree of such derivations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`runTest` returns a derivation that runs the test, or an tree of attribute sets of such derivations.
```

```

In that case, `numpy` is chosen from the generic `python3Packages`.

## Constructing a test matrix {#sec-nixos-test-matrix}

You may want to run variations of your test, or perhaps split long tests into
a few shorter, focused tests.

While you could roll your own solution with `mapAttrs`, this is actually
non-trivial because of the requirements imposed by `nix-build`, hydra and
`passthru.tests`. So instead, we recommend to use the `matrix` test options that
take care of this for you.

These options work by duplicating the entire test module configuration below

> the `matrix.<decision>.choice.<choice>.module` options.

Reviewer: How does order matter here?

Laziness makes this pattern efficient.

The test framework ([`runTest`](#sec-calling-nixos-tests)) takes care of
traversing the choices.

A parameterized test may look as follows:

```nix
{ lib, backend, ... }: {
  name = "foo-${backend}";

  matrix.backend.choice.smtp.module = {};
  matrix.backend.choice.rest.module = {};

  defaults.services.foo.backend = backend;

  nodes = …;
  testScript = ''
    ${lib.optionalString (backend == "rest") ''
      # extra setup for the rest backend
    ''}
    # …
  '';
}
```

> Instead of a single derivation, the test framework now returns:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of a single derivation, the test framework transforms this to:
```

```nix
{
  backend-rest = «derivation /nix/store/…-foo-rest.drv»;
  backend-smtp = «derivation /nix/store/…-foo-smtp.drv»;

>   # make nix-build traverse this attrset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  # make `nix-build` traverse this attrset
```

  recurseForDerivations = true;
  # …
}
```

It has picked up on the `matrix` and only returns the derivations constructed for each choice.

> The test related options such as `nodes` at the root of the test configuration still exist there, but are not demanded by `runTest`, so only their copies at each of the choices are evaluated. Hence, the "root" can see the consequences of the choices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The test related options such as `nodes` at the root of the test configuration still exist there, but are not required by `runTest`, so only their copies at each of the choices are evaluated. Hence, the "root" can see the consequences of the choices.
```

> Hence, the "root" can see the consequences of the choices.

What does this mean? What does "see" mean? What are "consequences"?

Some variations aren't simply parametric, but require specific configuration for some choices.
These can be added in the `module` submodule:

```nix
{ lib, setup, ... }: {
  matrix.backend.choice.smtp.module = { lib, setup, ... }: {
    defaults.services.foo.backend = "smtp";
    nodes.smtpserver = { … };
    _module.args.setup = "";
  };
  matrix.backend.choice.rest.module = { lib, setup, ... }: {
    _module.args.setup = ''
      # extra setup for the rest backend
    '';
  };

  nodes = …;
  testScript = ''
    ${setup}
    # …
  '';
}

> ```

Reviewer: This example requires more explanation to be useful. What is the role of `setup` here, and how is its value propagated through evaluation?

> And finally, some tests truly form a matrix, as they have two (or more) parameters, such as this example, producing the 6 test derivations that form the Cartesian product of `backend` and `testsuite`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And finally, some tests truly form a matrix, as they have two (or more) parameters
The following example produces the 6 test derivations that form the Cartesian product of `backend` and `testsuite`.
```

Note that the modules inside `module` submodule can access their parent's module
arguments through the lexical scope, where the matrix choice has not been decided
yet. Any such parameters must be ignored or repeated inside the `module` submodule

> to get the final value.

Reviewer: I really don't understand what this means. How exactly can the `module` submodules access their parent's argument? How would one get the final value? If this is important, please expand this note into a full example.

> And finally, some tests truly form a matrix, as they have two (or more) parameters, such as this example, producing the 6 test derivations that form the Cartesian product of `backend` and `testsuite`.
> 
> Note that the modules inside `module` submodule can access their parent's module
> arguments through the lexical scope, where the matrix choice has not been decided
> yet. Any such parameters must be ignored or repeated inside the `module` submodule
> to get the final value.
> 
> ```nix
> { backend, testsuite, ... }: {
>   matrix.backend.choice.smtp.module = { … };
>   matrix.backend.choice.rest.module = { … };
> 
>   matrix.testsuite.choice = {
>     login-and-basics.module = {
>       testScript = …;
>     };
>     transactions.module = {
>       testScript = …;
>     };
>     advanced-use-cases.module = {
>       testScript = …;
>     };
>   };
> 
>   name = "foo-${backend}-${testsuite}";
> 
>   nodes.foo = …;
> }
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And finally, some tests truly form a matrix, as they have two (or more) parameters
The following example produces the 6 test derivations that form the Cartesian product of `backend` and `testsuite`.

Note that the modules inside `module` submodule can access their parent's module
arguments through the lexical scope, where the matrix choice has not been decided
yet. Any such parameters must be ignored or repeated inside the `module` submodule
to get the final value.

```nix
{ backend, testsuite, ... }: {
  matrix.backend.choice.smtp.module = { … };
  matrix.backend.choice.rest.module = { … };

  matrix.testsuite.choice = {
    login-and-basics.module = {
      testScript = …;
    };
    transactions.module = {
      testScript = …;
    };
    advanced-use-cases.module = {
      testScript = …;
    };
  };

  name = "foo-${backend}-${testsuite}";

  nodes.foo = …;
}
```
```

> Note that the modules inside `module` submodule can access their parent's module
arguments through the lexical scope, where the matrix choice has not been decided
yet. Any such parameters must be ignored or repeated inside the `module` submodule
to get the final value.

I really don't understand what this means. How exactly can the `module` submodules access their parent's argument? How would one get the final value? If this is important, please expand this note into a full example.

non-trivial because of the requirements imposed by `nix-build`, hydra and
`passthru.tests`. So instead, we recommend to use the `matrix` test options that
take care of this for you.

These options work by duplicating the entire test module configuration below
the `matrix.<decision>.choice.<choice>.module` options.
Laziness makes this pattern efficient.

The test framework ([`runTest`](#sec-calling-nixos-tests)) takes care of
traversing the choices one by one, constructing a tree of attribute sets where
each edge represents a choice.

A parameterized test may look as follows:

```nix
{ lib, backend, ... }: {
  name = "foo-${backend}";

  matrix.backend.choice.smtp.module = {};
  matrix.backend.choice.rest.module = {};

  defaults.services.foo.backend = backend;

  nodes = …;
  testScript = ''
    ${lib.optionalString (backend == "rest") ''
      # extra setup for the rest backend
    ''}
    # …
  '';
}
```

`runTest` transforms this to:

```nix
{
  backend-rest = «derivation /nix/store/…-foo-rest.drv»;
  backend-smtp = «derivation /nix/store/…-foo-smtp.drv»;

  # make `nix-build` traverse this attrset to evaluate nested tests
  recurseForDerivations = true;
  # …
}
```

> It has picked up on the `matrix` and only returns the derivations constructed for each choice.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It has picked up on the `matrix` and only returns the derivations constructed for each choice.

The arguments to the test module, which is called by `runTest` to create each configuration in the matrix, are built up as follows:
`matrix.<decision>` corresponds to the argument name to the test module.
`choice.<choice>` corresponds to the named argument's value as a string.
```

Something along these lines would have made clear to me from the start how the attributes are related to the test module arguments.

Author: Changing to

```suggestion
It has picked up on the `matrix` and only returns the derivations constructed for each choice.

The arguments to the test module, which is called by `runTest` to create each configuration in the matrix, are built up as follows:
 - `<decision>` in `matrix.<decision>` corresponds to the argument name to the test module.
 - `<choice>` in `choice.<choice>` corresponds to the named argument's value as a string. Non-string values can be set with `_module.args` or other options inside [`choice.<choice>.module`](#opt-matrix._name_.choice._name_.module).

```

> `runTest` works by invoking the module system to lazily produce all option values, and then extracts the relevant values from it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`runTest` works by invoking the module system to lazily produce all option values.
```

I think the next sentence says the same thing that I removed.

Author: I want to stress here that some option values go unused because of laziness and how the matrix module works.
"for each test configuration" seems implied and does not describe how the code works, even if it's somewhat true at a high level.

> This means that some options exist, but are never evaluated. For example, when `matrix` isn't empty, `nodes.<name>` is ignored in favor of `matrix.<decision>.choice.<choice>.module.nodes.<name>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that some options exist, but are never evaluated. For example, when `matrix` is set, `nodes.<name>` is ignored in favor of `matrix.<decision>.choice.<choice>.module.nodes.<name>`.
```

> Nonetheless, the definitions that would contribute to `nodes.<name>` are useful, as they contribute to `matrix.<decision>.choice.<choice>.module.nodes.<name>`. The `module` option always duplicates and extends the root of the test configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nonetheless, the definitions in `nodes.<name>` are useful, as they contribute to `matrix.<decision>.choice.<choice>.module.nodes.<name>`.
The `module` option always duplicates and extends the root of the test configuration.
```

Some variations aren't simply parametric, but require specific configuration for some choices.
These can be added in the `module` submodule.

The following example shows how tests in a test matrix can be quite different, while sharing common configuration.

```nix
{ lib, setup, ... }: {
  matrix.backend.choice.smtp.module = { lib, ... }: {
    defaults.services.foo.backend = "smtp";
    nodes.smtpserver = { … };
    _module.args.setup = "";
  };
  matrix.backend.choice.rest.module = { lib, ... }: {
    _module.args.setup = ''
      # extra setup for the rest backend
      # …
    '';
  };

  nodes = …;
  testScript = ''
    ${setup}
    # …
  '';
}
```

The example shows the solutions to the following problems:
 - The test cases require different configuration. For example, the `smtp` test sets the backend to `"smtp"` for all nodes, instead of relying on the default value.
 - One test case requires an extra VM. `nodes.smtpserver` is only defined for the `smtp` test.
 - One test case needs extra setup to be done in the `testScript`. It uses an ad hoc module argument called `setup` to achieve this.

> You may notice that the test appears to pull a `setup` value out of thin air, and indeed this would fail if `runTest` had accessed `testScript` directly instead of looking inside the `matrix.<...>.module` options. Thanks to laziness, this is not a problem.

Reviewer: This does not explain at all why it works.

```suggestion
You may notice that the test appears to pull a `setup` value out of thin air.
Indeed, this would fail if `runTest` had accessed `testScript` directly instead of looking inside the `matrix.<...>.module` options.
Instead, `runTest` calls the top-level test module declaration in each of the configurations it produces, passing the `setup` argument with the value set in `_module.args.setup`.
```

Is this correct?

Author: A correct understanding, but with some incorrect technicalities.
 - "declaration" should be "definition"
 - we're giving `runTest` a bit too much agency, but if we need to mention all indirections, we're not more helpful than the code itself. This applies also to my own writing as well.

I'm changing it to this

```suggestion
You may notice that the test appears to pull a `setup` value out of thin air.
Indeed this would fail if `runTest` had accessed `testScript` directly instead of looking inside the `matrix.<...>.module` options.
In those `matrix.<...>.module` contexts, the definition of `testScript` is valid.
Thanks to laziness, the invalid `testScript` is never accessed and never becomes a problem.
```
